MobCloud: A Lightweight MapReduce based Cloud Framework for Mobile Devices

# Introduction #

The rise of increasingly powerful computational capabilities of ubiquitous mobile devices has opened new area of computational framework. These mobile systems, especially smart phones have now become the key computing platform for numerous users.  However, these mobile devices usually provide services to single user, and  depend on local data and programs. Moreover, some applications are too computation intensive to execute on mobile system. To use them , these computation can carry out on cloud. Cloud services can significantly improve the computing capability of mobile devices. However, software development in such distributed mobile environments is posed with challenges due to network availability and intermittency, large probability of failures, and concurrency problems. In this research, we design and implement MobileCloud, a MapReduce framework, on mobile systems. The framework allows application developers to add their applications for mobile devices, hiding the underlying complex implementation. We demonstrate the utility of our framework by implementing WordCount example. This application running on Android emulators, illustrates the feasibility of our approach.

# Details #

According to ABI Research [23](23.md), “By 2015, more than 240 million business customers will be leveraging cloud computing services through mobile devices, driving revenues of $5.2 billion”. On the contrary there were 42.8 million Mobile Cloud Computing subscribers in 2008 [23](23.md). This emphasizes the significance of cloud computing for mobile environment. With the advancement of technology, the processing power of mobile devices is also increasing. Therefore, these mobile devices can be used for different computational problems. However, these devices work independently and normally use to process local data and programs only. Although they can share data among them using centralized server, this requires both expensive uploads and downloads, and affects the wireless global networks. Due to these reasons it’s difficult for these devices to share data and computing resources with one another. Besides this, other issues like high failure rate, data transfer, concurrency, resource allocation, and software development platform, make application development in distributed mobile environment very challenging.

Extended computational capabilities of the current mobile devices have brought new challenges today and strengthened the need for a framework which simplifies the programming of computation intensive applications on the mobile devices. Since mobile cloud computing is still in its infancy, therefore, in this research; the idea is to introduce light weight framework build around the Map Reduce abstraction for addressing the above concerns.

MapReduce is a programming model developed by Google for parallel and distributed processing of batch jobs [8](8.md). There are two phases in each job. The mapping phase partitions the input data by associating each element with a key. The reduce phase processes each partition independently. All data processing is based on key/value pairs. A map function processes key/value pair and generate list of intermediate key/value pairs. The reduce function combines all intermediate values associated with the same intermediate key.